Website "Contribution" documentation page update following the "Contribution/Collaboration Model" RFC (#1619)
hashicorp/design-system: website/docs/about/contribution.md

---
title: Contribution

> description: How to collaborate with the Design System team and contribute to the system.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
description: How to collaborate with the Design Systems team and contribute to the system.
```

Reviewer: We should discuss what to standardize on but I thought the usual term was "design systems" with an "s".

Author: Ah, good point. I just used what was in the original version, but I checked our [Writing Guidelines](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1WyoJVpWFVgWbCnZ28WW0gRJwJlj-qV5oY0ExhDR2obs/edit#heading=h.bnsoklnnc6rw) and we did define a consistent approach to this. I'll update all the instances to use "Design Systems Team" to match what is likely being used most across the website. Thanks for noting!

Author: Yup, I specifically called that out in my last comment and it's why I haven't accepted any of the suggestions for it. 🙂  I'm working on the fixes now and will have them committed soon for re-review.

Reviewer: Sorry didn't read closely enough. Thanks!

Author: No worries, @KristinLBradley. Thanks for the thorough review! I think I caught all of your suggestions, and it's ready for re-review. Let me know if there's anything else.

navigation:
  order: 104
---

!!! Info

> We currently only accepting collaborations from HashiCorp employees. Resources and links on this page may only be available to HashiCorp employees.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We are currently only accepting collaborations from HashiCorp employees. Resources and links on this page may only be available to HashiCorp employees.
```

> We are currently only accepting collaborations from HashiCorp employees. Resources and links on this page may only be available to HashiCorp employees.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We are currently accepting collaborations only from HashiCorp employees. Resources and links on this page are generally only available to HashiCorp employees.
```

!!!

Thank you for your interest in contributing to the Helios Design System. We think of contributions as an opportunity for **collaboration across teams** and are open to various forms of collaboration, even direct contribution, as long as they follow our [collaborative process](/about/contribution/#our-collaborative-process). 

## Collaboration types

Possible forms of collaboration include, but are not limited to: 

> - [Direct contributions](/about/contribution/#direct-contributions), like bug fixes, documentation improvements, small enhancements to existing artifacts, etc.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [Direct contributions](/about/contribution/#direct-contributions), such as bug fixes, documentation improvements, small enhancements to existing artifacts, etc.
```

> - Net-new artifacts, like icons, components, patterns, etc.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- New artifacts, such as icons, components, patterns, etc.
```

> - Obtaining support, feedback, and usage guidance from the Design System team.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Obtaining support, feedback, and usage guidance from the Design Systems team.
```

## Our collaborative process

Our collaborative process is intended to be a guideline, not a playbook. Each collaboration may be different depending on the complexity of the proposal. This process generally works best for larger collaboration projects, but we’ll help define the necessary steps based on your project type during the kickoff.

### Submit a new request

> Before submitting a new request, check that the issue doesn’t already exist in our [backlog](https://hashicorp.atlassian.net/jira/software/c/projects/HDS/boards/1082). If no request exists, create a new issue using our [intake form](https://hashicorp.atlassian.net/wiki/spaces/HDS/pages/2648080407/PROTOTYPE+Helios+HDS+Support+Intake+Form). Creating an issue allows us to track and prioritize all requests in one central location easily.

Reviewer 3: I need to think of a better suggestion, but this link is only partially complete from a backlog perspective as it wouldn't include things we've prioritize independent from consumers requests (which may overlap)

Author: @Dhaulagiri Is there a place in Jira where **all** backlog tickets are stored?

Reviewer 3: Not in the sense that we're looking for here. Most likely the [rollout tracker](https://go.hashi.co/hds-rollout) is still the best we have as it _should_ contain a representative list of all the potential projects we're aware of, but the introduction of Feature Requests is complicating that some (I need to investigate that more still).

Author: The rollout tracker only shows issues connected to epics; not all consumer-requested issues (or even issues we add for fixes/improvements) are connected to epics. My goal with asking consumers to look at our backlog before submitting an issue is to avoid duplicate issues; instead, I'd like them to add comments/upvote the existing issue if it's already there. Consumer requests may be bug fixes/issues, not complex projects or new components/patterns, so I'm not sure the rollout tracker is representative enough.

Reviewer 3: That's a good/fair point. We can alway start with what you have and if we come up with something better we can update it.

> Alternatively, if you just have a question or you’re not sure your project is right for collaboration, reach out to the Design System team in [#team-design-systems](https://hashicorp.slack.com/archives/C7KTUHNUS).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Alternatively, if you just have a question or you’re not sure your project is right for collaboration, reach out to the Design Systems team in [#team-design-systems](https://hashicorp.slack.com/archives/C7KTUHNUS).
```

### Evaluation of the request

> The Design System team will then evaluate each incoming request and provide the Requestor with a decision. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Design Systems team will then evaluate each incoming request and provide the Requestor with a decision. 
```

#### How we evaluate requests

We evaluate requests based on the following criteria:

- Reusability across multiple products
- Relevance and added value for the design system as a whole
- Integration with existing foundations, components, and features of the system
- Impact on existing components, especially in the case of breaking changes

> - Expected effort and possible complexities and unknowns involved

Reviewer 4: should this be:
```suggestion
- Expected effort, possible complexities, and unknowns involved
```

> - Availability of resources on the Design System team

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Availability of resources on the Design Systems team
```

- Prioritization in relation to other initiatives already undertaken and/or planned

#### Possible outcomes

Based on the evaluation criteria, there are different possible outcomes:

> - We start or plan to **dedicate time and resources to the project**. We plan a kickoff with the Requestor to further discuss the project.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- We start or plan to **dedicate time and resources to the project**. We plan a kickoff with the requestor to further discuss the project.
```

- We believe there’s an **opportunity for future collaboration**, but don’t have time or resources to dedicate to it now. We’ll continue to monitor interest in the request and re-evaluate it in the (near) future.

> - We **can’t support this request**. We’ll provide guidance and suggestions on how to move forward, but the final decision on how to proceed with the work will be left to the Requestor.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- We **can’t support this request**. We’ll provide guidance and suggestions on how to move forward, but the final decision on how to proceed with the work will be left to the requestor.
```

### Kickoff meeting

> We’ll organize a Kickoff meeting with the Requestor (and any necessary stakeholders) for projects to which we can dedicate time and resources. In this Kickoff meeting, we aim to define the following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We’ll organize a kickoff meeting with the requestor (and any necessary stakeholders) for projects to which we can dedicate time and resources. In this kickoff meeting, we aim to define the following:
```

> - What resources from each team will be allocated to the project, and what each individual's role is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- What resources from each team will be allocated to the project, and what each individual’s role is
```

- What the scope of the project is (or if more discovery is necessary), and if the project can be delivered incrementally
- What the timeline for the project is, and if there’s a deadline that needs to be met
- What the open questions, risks, or unknowns are for this project
- Who the stakeholders are, what their involvement is, and whose approval is required
- What the first actionable steps and milestones are
- How the team plans to communicate about the project

### Collaborative execution

> The dedicated resources from each team will work together to complete the project according to the scope and timeline defined in the kickoff. This process is variable, depending on the project’s complexity, and it can be quite intensive for larger collaborations given the high bar for quality required. This project will need to go through thorough reviews with key stakeholders, as defined in the kickoff.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The dedicated resources from each team will work together to complete the project according to the scope and timeline defined in the kickoff. This process is variable, depending on the project’s complexity, and it can be quite intensive for larger collaborations given the high bar for quality required. The project will need to go through thorough reviews with key stakeholders, as defined in the kickoff.
```

> To get an idea of what this process could look like, please refer to [the process followed by the Design System team when building a net-new component](https://github.com/hashicorp/design-system/blob/main/packages/components/NEW-COMPONENT-CHECKLIST.md).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To get an idea of what this process could look like, please refer to [the process followed by the Design Systems team when building a net new component](https://github.com/hashicorp/design-system/blob/main/packages/components/NEW-COMPONENT-CHECKLIST.md).
```

### Implementation and release

Once reviewed and approved, the feature can be implemented and released in Helios. 

> - The Design System team will:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The Design Systems team will:
```

    - Document these artifacts on the Helios website
    - Release the artifacts that were created/ported/updated in collaboration with the product team
    - Publicize the release of these new artifacts, as well as the fact that they were the result of of a joint collaboration with the product team
- The product team will:

>     - Follow the guidance provided by the Design System team in the follow-up work related to the collaboration effort

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - Follow the guidance provided by the Design Systems team in the follow-up work related to the collaboration effort
```

    - Have a clear plan to adopt the artifacts produced during the collaboration

## Direct contributions

> We support a small number of autonomous but coordinated direct contributions. These include bug fixes in the code, new icons, documentation improvements, and small enhancements to exitsting components.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We support a small number of autonomous but coordinated direct contributions. These include bug fixes in the code, new icons, documentation improvements, and small enhancements to existing components.
```

### Contribute a new icon in Figma

If you’d like to add a new icon to the [icon library](/icons/library), follow the steps in the [Figma library README](https://www.figma.com/file/MYiw4kiVpunIMMw0sBkE1t/%E2%9C%8F%EF%B8%8F-Flight-Development?node-id=566%3A1129&t=Bbflj3UUaWVyhamn-4).

### Contribute in code

To work in one of the Helios code packages, consult the corresponding `CONTRIBUTING.md` file for:
- [Tokens](https://github.com/hashicorp/design-system/blob/main/packages/tokens/CONTRIBUTING.md)
- [Ember Flight Icons](https://github.com/hashicorp/design-system/blob/main/packages/ember-flight-icons/CONTRIBUTING.md)
- [Components](https://github.com/hashicorp/design-system/blob/main/packages/components/CONTRIBUTING.md)

> Review the [Engineering Checklist for new components](https://github.com/hashicorp/design-system/blob/main/packages/components/NEW-COMPONENT-CHECKLIST.md#engineering-checklist) if you’re working on a net-new component.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Review the [Engineering Checklist for new components](https://github.com/hashicorp/design-system/blob/main/packages/components/NEW-COMPONENT-CHECKLIST.md#engineering-checklist) if you’re working on a new component.
```

Reviewer: Btw, to me just saying "new" sounds simpler and is clear enough so I've been editing the references here but if you prefer to keep the "net new" term then just remove the dash.

If you need to test the component in one of our consumers’ codebases, review the [instructions for testing a component in Cloud UI](https://github.com/hashicorp/design-system/blob/main/packages/components/HOW-TO-TEST-A-COMPONENT-IN-CLOUD-UI.md).

## Resources

> Learn how the [Collaboration Model for the Helios Design System](https://hermes.hashicorp.services/document/1_5ARBNK3ZLNAB7L2mo5H9e4GKMqEfjRaVIGE77mrEvA) took shape.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Learn how the [Collaboration Model for the Helios Design System](https://go.hashi.co/rfc/ds-059) took shape.
```
